Ray Bradbury
(1949)

The first powerful blow ripped open the side of the rocket like a huge can opener. The people, thrown out by the explosion, turned into a dozen silvery fish, helplessly fighting on the shore. They were scattered in the dark, and the ship, which fell to pieces, continued on its way with a million fragments, a swarm of meteorites, rushing in search of the hopelessly lost Sun.

Woody! Woody!

Captain!

Hollis, Hollis, it's me, Stone!

Stone, I'm Hollis! Where are you?

I dont know. How should I know? Where is the top? Where is the bottom? I'm falling ... my God, I'm falling!

They fell. They fell like pebbles into a well. A handful of pebbles thrown into the air by someone's hand. There were no people - there were only voices. The voices are disembodied, frightened, full of horror ... Submission ...

We fly in different directions!

And so it was. Hollis, tumbling in the void, also realized that it was so. I understood and stupidly accepted it. They scatter, each has its own path, and nothing will connect them again. Frightened pale faces covered with transparent helmets ... Although everyone was wearing hermetically sealed spacesuits, no one had time to put on a backpack with a rocket engine. If only someone had him behind him, he would immediately become a small lifeboat and could have saved himself and come to the aid of others. Then they could, having found each other, get together, turning into a living island, and they would probably come up with something. But now they were just scattered meteorites, each of which rushed blindly towards their inevitable fate.

It must have been about ten minutes before the first attack of terror subsided, and now they all seemed to be plunged into a daze. The void around it was a huge loom that began to weave strange threads, voices converging, diverging, criss-crossing, forming their last pattern.

Hollis, I'm Stone. How long do you think we can talk on the radio?

It depends on how fast we fly away.

Probably about an hour.

What happened? he asked a minute later.

Our rocket exploded, that's all. It happens with rockets.

Which direction are you heading?

Looks like I'm going to hit the moon.

And I am to the Earth. I hasten to meet Mother Earth at a speed of ten thousand miles an hour. I'll burn like a match! Hollis thought of this with startling detachment. He seemed to be looking from the side at his own body falling into emptiness, looked indifferently, as once, in distant childhood, in winter, he watched the first falling snowflakes.

The rest were silent, trying in vain to realize what had happened to them, and fell, fell, unable to do anything about it. The captain was also silent, not finding the right team, the necessary plan of action that would help bring everyone back together.

Oh, how long can we fall! How long to fall, long, long, - suddenly a voice rang out. “I don’t want to die like that, I don’t want to die, how long, how long to fall ...

Who is it?

I do not know.

Probably Stimpson. Is that you, Stimpson?

Long, long - I don't want to! Oh my God, I don't want that!

Stimpson, this is Hollis. Stimpson, can you hear me?

Silence ... They fall one by one, who-where ...

Stimson!

Yes? - Stimpson finally responds.

Control yourself, Stimpson. We are all equally stuck.

But I don't like this. I want to get out of here.

Maybe they will find us yet.

Let them find me, let them find me, ”Stimson yelled. - This cannot be, I do not believe that this could happen ...

Well, of course, all this is just a bad dream, - someone quipped.

Shut up! Hollis called out to him.

And you try, shut my throat, - said the same voice. It was Applegate. He laughed. Cheerfully, as if nothing had happened: "Can you hear me? Come here and shut my throat!

And Hollis for the first time truly felt his helplessness. Blind rage overwhelmed him, more than anything he wanted to get to Applegate right now. For many years he had wanted to get to him, and now - now it's too late ... Now Applegate is nothing more than an unattainable voice, sounding in his headset.

Falling, falling, falling ...

And suddenly, as if only now the whole horror of what had happened was revealed to them, two of those falling into the abyss burst into desperate cries. As if in a nightmare, Hollis saw one of them swimming very close. He screamed and screamed ...

Stop!

You could reach someone flying by. Having lost his mind, he came out with a mad, inhuman cry. He will never stop yelling! This scream will be heard from millions of miles away, and as long as the transmitter has enough power, it will drive everyone crazy, because of it they will not be able to talk to each other.

Hollis made a desperate effort. There was no other way out. A little more, and he managed to get closer to the screaming one. Grabbing his ankle, he pulled himself closer. Now the madman's face, distorted by a scream, was very close. He screamed, clutching Hollis with his hands, meaningless and wild, like a drowning man. His insane scream filled the entire universe.

One way or another, Hollis thought. - All the same, he will be killed by the Moon, Earth, or meteorites ... So, or in another way ... "

He brought his iron fist down on the poor man's transparent helmet. The scream ended. Hollis pushed off the corpse, and he, whirling, flew away, in its endless fall.

And he, Hollis, also fell, fell into the void, and everyone else swirled in this endless whirlwind of silent fall.

Hollis, are you still alive?

Hollis didn’t answer, but his face seemed to burn with heat.

It's me again, Applegate.

I'm listening.

Let's talk. All the same, there is nothing to do.

Enough talking! “We need to think about what to do next,” the captain's voice intervened in their conversation.

Shut up! Applegate cut him off.

What did you say?!
“You heard me perfectly, Captain. I don't give a damn about your ranks and titles, you are now ten thousand miles away from me, and there is no need to play the fool! As Stimson puts it, it will take us so long to fall ...

Listen, Applegate!

Get off! I am raising a riot. I have nothing to lose, damn me! Your ship was a lousy ship, and you were its lousy captain. And now, son of a bitch, I wish you to crash into the moon and break your neck.

I order you to shut up!

Go ahead, order. Applegate chuckled ten thousand miles away. The captain fell silent.
“So what were we talking about, Hollis? Applegate went on calmly. "Ah, yes, I remember." I hate you too. You yourself know that very well. You know a long time ago ...

Hollis clenched his fists helplessly.

Now I'll tell you something. I will please you a little. You know, I failed you when you were seeking a place in the Rocket Company five years ago.

A meteorite flashed nearby. Hollis looked down, his left hand sliced \u200b\u200boff like a knife. Blood was gushing from the suit. Together with her, the air rapidly disappeared. Holding his breath, he tightly tightened the fastener at the elbow with his left hand with his right hand, grabbed the sleeve and restored its tightness. Everything happened so quickly that he didn't even have time to be surprised. Now nothing could surprise him. The leak was stopped, the suit was filled with air again. Hollis tugged on his sleeve even tighter, like a tourniquet, and the blood that had just gushed like a hose stopped.

During those terrible seconds, he did not make a sound. The rest talked to each other. One of them - Lespert - chatted incessantly. He boasted that he had one wife on Mars, another on Venus, and another on Jupiter - and they all adore him. And, in general, he had great fun in his lifetime - he drank, played, lived for his own pleasure, and he always had money - "the chickens did not peck"!
They kept falling and falling, and he chatted and chatted. I fell uncontrollably into the arms of death, bathing in sweet memories of my past happy days.

It was all so strange ... Emptiness, thousands of miles of emptiness, and voices tremble in this emptiness. Around - not a soul - only the sounds carried by radio waves tremble, hesitate, trying with all his might to excite those who hear them.

Are you mad, Hollis?

He really wasn't angry. Indifference seized him again, he was again an insensitive stone falling into nowhere.

You've tried to advance your entire life, Hollis. And I probably didn't understand why you are always unlucky. And you were unlucky all the time due to the fact that I substituted your leg, before I myself was thrown out the door.

I don't care, ”Hollis said.

He really didn't care. Everything is left behind. The whole life lived on the verge of its completion resembles a bright film that flashed on the screen - all her victories, passions and disappointments flare up for a moment before my eyes, and you will not have time to shout - this day was happy, but that one was unhappy, here - cute face, but - hateful - as the film has already ended, and the screen went out.

Life was already behind him, and, looking back at her, he regretted only one thing - he wanted to live more and more ... Is it really like that with everyone before death - the time has come to die, but it seems as if he had not lived yet? Is life really so short - did not have time to breathe, but everything is already over? Interestingly, it seems to everyone so unfairly short - or only to him, here, in the void, when only a few hours remain in order to comprehend all this?

And Lesper, meanwhile, continued to chatter:

Believe it or not, I lived well: a wife on Mars, a wife on Venus, on Jupiter ... And they are all beauties, they all cared for and cherished me. I drank as much as I wanted, and once spent twenty thousand in a casino ...

Now you're in trouble, Hollis thought. - I had none of this. I used to envy you, Lesper. While I had something ahead, I envied your love affairs and your happy life. I was afraid of women and, probably, because of this I went into space, but even here I thought about them all the time and envied the fact that you have a lot of women and a lot of money, and you live carefree and fun. And now, when everything is over, and we are falling, each one on his own, I no longer envy you, because for you now everything is over, as if nothing had happened ”.

Hollis braced himself and shouted into the microphone.

It's over, Lesper!

Silence.

Or maybe there was nothing, but Lespert?

It's me, Hollis.

He acted meanly. He felt it, but was impending death less mean and meaningless? Applegate hurt him, and now he wanted to hurt another. In revenge for Applegate and this pitiless emptiness around.

You're in trouble, like the rest of us, Lespire. Its end. As if there was no life, right?

It is not true!

If it's over, it's like nothing happened. How is your life better than mine now? Now, this minute? Are you better now than me? Better?

Yes, it's better.

The fact that I have something to remember! - angrily shouted Lespert from afar, clinging to the memories dear to his heart with both hands.

And he was right. Hollis felt as if it were ice-cold water - he understood: Lesper was right. Memories and dreams are not the same thing. He always only dreamed, only wanted everything that Lespir achieved and what he now remembers ... Yes, it is ... This thought tormented Hollis unhurriedly, mercilessly, burning in the most sore spot.

Well, now, now, what do you get from all this? he shouted to Lespert. - If it's all over and over, what joy is there? You are no better now than me.

I'm leaving calmly, - said Lespir. - I am glad of my life lived. And I did not become a scoundrel like you before death.

A scoundrel? Hollis repeated, tasting the word.

For as long as he could remember himself, he had never in his life happened to do something mean. He didn't dare. Everything vile and low must have accumulated in him for the future for such an hour. "Scoundrel" ... - He stuffed this word into the farthest corner of his mind. Tears welled up in his eyes and rolled down his cheeks. Someone must have heard him sob.

Don't be upset, Hollis.

Of course it's funny. Just a few minutes ago, he gave advice to others, calmed Stimpson - he considered himself a real brave, but in fact - it was not courage at all - he was just numb, as happens from a strong shock, from shock. And now he is trying to squeeze into the short remaining minutes all that he has suppressed in himself all his life.

I understand how you feel, Hollis, heard Lespert's fainting voice, now twenty thousand miles apart. - I'm not angry with you.

“Are we not the same with Lespert? Hollis asked himself. - Here, now - do we not have the same destiny? Everything has passed, everything is over once and for all - what's the point of all this, since we are all dying now. " But in the depths of his consciousness, he understood all the senselessness of such reasoning, similar to an attempt to determine the difference between a living person and a corpse. In the first there is some kind of spark, something mysterious, and elusive, but in the other - not.

And Lespert is not at all like him: Lespert lived excitedly, and now he is completely different, and he, Hollis, has been dead for many years. They went to death by different roads. Death is not the same for everyone - his death and Lespert's death are as different from each other as day and night. It turns out that you can die, as well as live, in a thousand ways, and if you have already died once, what new can you expect from the last and final death.

A second later, his right foot was blown off. He almost burst out laughing. All the air came out of the suit again. Hollis quickly bent down - blood gushed like a fountain - another meteorite cut off his leg and suit ankle-deep. Yes, this is a funny thing - death in interplanetary space. She, like a real butcher, cuts you into pieces. Hollis tightened the valve at his knee. His head was spinning from pain, he struggled not to lose consciousness; finally the valve is turned up to the full, the blood stopped, the air filled the suit again; and he falls again, falls, all that remains for him is to fall ...

Hey Hollis?

Hollis nodded sleepily, tired of waiting for death.

It's me again, Applegate, ”said the same voice.

I had time to think. I overheard your conversation with Lespert. All this is not good ... We become cruel. It’s not good to leave life like that. Releasing your evil on others ... Are you listening to me, Hollis?

What I said to you is not true! I didn't fail you. I myself don't know why I blurted it out. Probably to annoy you. We didn't get along very well before. It seems that I am getting old so quickly, so I hasten to repent. You spoke badly with Lesper - and you know, it seems that I also felt ashamed ... In general, all this is nonsense, but you should know - I was playing the fool too. Everything that I told you is a complete lie. And ... Go to hell!

Hollis felt his heart flutter. For those long five minutes it did not beat at all, but now the blood ran through my veins again. The first shock had passed, and now the waves of anger, horror, loneliness were rolling back ... It was as if you left from under a cold shower in the morning and, having breakfast, is ready to start your new day.

Thank you Applegate.

Stone, are you ?! - Hollis screamed to the whole Universe. Stone was of all - one of his true friends!

I was carried into a meteorite swarm - there is a huge heap of small asteroids.

What are these meteorites?

It seems to me that this is a group of Myrmidonyans - they pass by Mars, heading for Earth once every five years. I hit the very middle. It looks like a huge kaleidoscope. Outlandish shards. All multi-colored, of the most different shapes and sizes. Lord! How beautiful it is!

Looks like I'm flying with them. I fell into their attraction. Damn me!

He laughed.

As much as he strained his vision, Hollis never saw anything. Only huge rubies and sapphires of stars, emerald nebulae and black velvet of emptiness, and the voice of God is heard among the crystal spheres. How strange it is, amazing - here Stone flies with a meteorite swarm into the cold darkness, beyond the orbit of Mars, in order to return to Earth every five years - to flicker in the earth's sky and disappear again, and so hundreds and millions of years. From century to century, Stone, along with a swarm of Myrmidonyans, will fly, forming more and more new patterns, like colored glass in a kaleidoscope through which you looked at the sun as a boy, shaking the cardboard tube again and again.

Goodbye, Hollis, Stone's barely audible voice came. - See you later!

Good luck to you! Hollis shouted back thirty thousand miles away.

Don't make me laugh, ”Stone chuckled and disappeared. The stars closed around.

See you later!

Do not remember it dashingly!

Last goodbyes. More and more ... Short, without wasting words. A huge brain lost in endless space fell apart. And these parts of him, which worked together so beautifully and harmoniously until they were united by the skull of a rocket penetrating space, now die one after another, destroying the meaning of their common existence. And, as a living creature dies when the brain fails, so now the very spirit of the ship was dying, the memory of those long days lived side by side was dying. Applegate is now just a finger torn off from the body, there is no need to despise, hate him. The brain burst, and meaningless, useless debris flew in all directions. Voices died, space numb. Hollns was left with him one-on-one. He falls ...

The crew is gone. All voices disappeared, as if God had dropped a few words, and a short echo wavered and got lost in the starry abyss. The captain rushes to the moon, Stone is carried away by a swarm of meteorites. Stimson ... Applegate, flying to Pluto ... Smith ... Turner ... Underwood and all the others - the pieces of a kaleidoscope, diligently folded into a changeable thinking pattern, now, scattering, scatter in different directions.

And I? Hollns thought. What should I do? How to justify your meaningless, worthless life? What good deed can I redeem my meanness that has been accumulating in me for so many years? Now no one is around, I am alone - what can you do good when you are all alone? Nothing! Tomorrow night I will crash into the earth's atmosphere and burn, scattering dust over all continents. That's all the benefit of me. Not much, of course, but all the same - dust is dust, and it will unite with the Earth.

He fell swiftly, like a bullet, like a stone - calm, completely calm, feeling neither sadness nor joy - nothing ... He only wanted one thing: to do something good now that everything was over, to do at least something good and to know that he did it ...

"When I hit the air, I will explode like a meteor."

I wonder, - he said aloud, - will anyone see me?

A little boy on a country road looked up and shouted:

Mom, mom, look! Falling star!

A dazzlingly bright star traced the sky and sank into twilight somewhere over Illinois.

Make a wish, ”his mother whispered. - Make a wish soon!
